Here's a more or less direct follow up to my last post
on the 
[epistemology of counterfactuals](/blog/2012/10/20/the-epistemology-of-counterfactuals/).
The basic idea is that the same strategy I talked about there
works as a way of learning other kinds of modal claims.
I'm going to take the example of learning about chance claims,
but I think you could make the same argument
*mutatis mutandis* for physical possibility,
and perhaps for other sorts of modal notions.
I'll end with a totally off the wall suggestion about
ethics.

<!-- more -->
OK. 
Recall that the basic thrust of my epistemology
of counterfactuals was that *somehow* we come to 
assess similarity of certain past observational situations
with the current situation, and this notion of similarity across
past-observed-actual-counterparts fixes the truth of certain
counterfactual claims we might like to make about the current situation.

In the same way, we might want to say that we *somehow*
come to fit "chance set-ups" into collectives of similar
past-observed-chance-set-ups, and this is what fixes the values of
the chances of outcomes of such set-ups.
That is, it is observed coin flips that count as the 
collective of relevantly similar set-ups that determines the
chance of the current coin's chance of landing heads.
In the last post I just glossed over how we get at 
the right notion of similarity.
But in the current case,
there's a whole literature on how difficult it is
to fix the right collective of relevantly similar set-ups:
this is the reference class problem.
But remember that I'm doing a sort of phenomenological 
reconstruction of the epistemology of modals,
not giving an account of what grounds the truth of modal claims.
So basically I am just going to sidestep the reference class
problem by saying that
humans have some sort of capacity for recognising similarity,
recognising patterns, and so on.
We have managed to learn which kinds of similarity are salient for what
kinds of inference.
To demand a further explanation of how we come
to recognise salient similarity is,
it seems to me, 
the problem of induction in disguise.
By that I mean that I have the same response to both:
"we can just do it, OK?".

What I've said above may seem,
on its own,
to be fairly trivial.
We learn about chances through learning about
the statistics of the reference classes to which the set-ups belong.
And yes, that's a pretty trivial point.
But as I said at the beginning, the idea is that this is an example
of how we come to learn about modal claims in general.
Seeing the epistemology of chances in this light
allows us to look at what sort of cross-pollination
might be fruitful: 
what ideas and arguments in the chance literature
might have some traction in, say, the literature on
counterfactuals.
One thing to note is that there is,
on this framing of the issues,
a similarity between the problem of 
salient similarity for counterfactuals
and the reference class problem for 
chances.
Both problems stem from there being too many
ways to structure the space of things (actual counterparts
or chance set-ups)
and not enough constraints on what counts as a legitimate
structuring.
By structuring, I mean here fixing a relation of similarity
or a carving up of the set-ups into reference classes.
Both of these problems, 
it seems, could be solved
if only there were an objective notion
of naturalness or "projectibility".
Both of these problems aren't really problems for the epistemology
because we somehow learn to use "good enough" structurings
of the things.

There's obviously a lot of vagueness in the above few paragraphs,
but I think there is food for thought there.

Now, as promised, here's the off the wall thought about ethics:
what if deontic modalities are learned about in the same way?
Might we learn what is permissible and what is obligatory
from observing similar actual situations, the agents' actions
and whether or not they were approved of?